Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Decent. I'm your host as always Ricard Lobs. And
today I'm joined by Doctor Andy Clark. He is
Professor of Cognitive Philosophy at the University of Sussex.
And today we're focusing on his latest book, The
Experience Machine, How our minds predict and shape reality.
So Wendy, welcome to the show. It's a huge
pleasure to finally everyone.
Thanks so much for having me. And uh yeah,
it took us a while to uh to get
the diaries to align, but it's great to be
here.
Great. So let me ask you before we get
into more specific or concrete questions. What is the
main argument that you present in your book? What
is this experience machine you're talking about?
Yeah, I mean, I guess that uh the core
experience machine is a brain even though I'm really
interested in the the whole brain body environment kind
of uh nexus. But the core idea in the
book is that we don't experience the world or
our own bodies in what you could think of
as a kind of raw way. We never in
that sense, get the world or our bodies exactly
right. We don't even know really what that would
mean. Instead, what we experience arises at the meeting
point of what our brains are predicting and what
the sensory information seems to be saying. But in
a way that's only half the story and the
other half is that, that meeting point is kind
of unstable. It's always um modulated or negotiated by
another thing which is the brain's ongoing estimates of
the usefulness, the reliability, the certainty or uncertainty of
the predictions versus the sensory information. And I think
it's that combination of a central role for pre
prediction and a central role for self estimated uncertainty.
That is the the sort of real core of
this story.
So could we say then that our perceptions are
constructs of our brains and do not correspond exactly
to something out there in the world, at least
directly.
Yeah, I mean, of course, venturing into a very,
very delicate philosophical territory there. But um I would
certainly want to say that what we experience is
if you like our brain's best guess at the
actionable world. So what you know what the actionable
world has to do with the world out there
as according to physics, for example, that's a whole
other question. But what brains are good at I
think is is estimating how best to act and
intervene on the world. And what we encounter is
a world that is presented to us in a
way apt for intervention and poking and prodding and
grabbing things and throwing things all of that. So
I think that's what we experience. Um And is
it just a construct? Well, no, because it is
deeply anchored in how things are in some way.
You know, if you get, if you put your
foot in the wrong place on the, on the
bridge and you plum it into the ravine, you've
definitely got something wrong. The world is kind of
telling you this is, this is not the right
way to go. Um And so what keeps us
in touch with the world are prediction error signals.
So the brain is constructing something, making this sort
of picture of, of how things are. But when
that picture fails to accommodate the incoming sensory information
fully, then prediction errors result, they ignore the mismatch
between what the brain expects. And if you like
what the brain body system is getting and they
then propagate through the system to try to get
a better get in place. Obviously, this all happens
really fast and at multiple sort of multiple kind
of little uh little circuitry um areas in the
brain. So we don't experience that, but as our
experience emerges in a way, we're guessing at the
world, letting the world poke back through prediction errors,
guessing again, poke back again until we run out
of time, or we've accommodated enough prediction error to
settle into uh uh a picture of how things
are which we normally be kind of on the
right track otherwise we wouldn't be here.
But when it comes to uh predicting the world,
uh they, they have our brain or mind as
a prediction machine originally. Where do the predictions our
brains, our brains make come from? I mean, before
we start having more experience, uh perceiving the world
and then correct some of the things that we,
we're getting wrong. I mean, is there anything innate
to these predictions or not?
Yeah, that's a really good, a really good question.
Um Obviously, if we're gonna construct experience around predictions,
the question arises. So where do the predictions come
from? And indeed, how good are they? Um One
of the really important early results in this kind
of area was that if you take an artificial
neural network and you set it the the task
of um predicting the flow of sensory information, then
even if it starts with a really, really bad
model of the world, just with random assignments to
its uh to its weights, the kind of artificial
synapses under those conditions because it's trying to predict
and getting a feedback signal saying no, you got
that. Uh YOU got that wrong that it's not
a successful prediction over time, it will slowly come
to a set of predictions that work in the
kind of uh environment that you set it to
work in. So that's an interesting existence proof. I
think that and that these kinds of learning systems
can refine themselves just by trying to do the
prediction task. So you've got this wonderful chance of
bootstrapping. But of course, the trouble is that evolved
creatures better not start with a really, really bad
model of the world and just rely on prediction
errors to tune it. Because if that was gonna,
if they started from there, then I think they
wouldn't survive long enough to let the flow of
prediction errors do the right work. So I think
we've got to start with some sort of set
of innate broadly speaking, expectations about the kind of
world that we're going to inhabit. Um BUT they
can be very much refined during childhood, perhaps they
even start to be refined in the womb. You
know, there's interesting work about how the sounds that
a child is hearing in the womb are actually
changing, the way that it will hear sounds when
it comes out of the womb. So, you know,
we're learning machines from the get go and uh
what nature and evolution have given us, I think
is kind of just enough expectations about our world
to kind of stay alive and keep going to
do some better learning so that we can really
tune them so that we become good prediction machines
on top of the kind of world we actually
live in, which may be very different to the
one that uh that was present when evolution selected
the broad structures of our, of our neural systems.
So um predictions come from the effort to predict
plus evolution.
Mhm uh And this memory also play a role
here. I mean, are our predictions informed also by
our memories?
Yes, absolutely. I mean, so much for that, I
think that um that memory if you like is
nothing other than the generative model that iss issue
in the predictions. So, um and this is generative
model in the same sense as uh as as
work in um generative A I that we're all
seeing at the moment. It's a, it's an inner
organization that has the power to create simulations of
data structures for itself. Um I think that's what
memory is. Memory is a way of um of
kind of self queuing. So as to create a
data structure that is very similar to the one
that you might have encountered previously in your existence.
So memory I think is a sort of in
a, in a way it's the heart of the
prediction machine predictions are based on memory. But it's
a very, it's this very structured kind of memory
that allows the system to, to simulate the world
for itself. And that I think is uh it's
a kind of very special kind of memory. Um
Hawkins uh um who wrote one of the early
books in this sort of area, actually described the
brain, I think as a memory prediction machine
and tell us about this idea of perception as
controlled hallucination. What does that mean?
Yeah, that's, uh, I, I have a sort of
love hate relationship with that phrase. It's so, it's
been around for a while. I've used it myself.
I don't think anyone knows exactly where it comes
from. Some people think it comes from, um, max
Clauses, a machine learning theorist. Um, THERE are other
possibilities. I've heard it used by annual Seth as
well. So, what does it mean? Perception has controlled
hallucination? Um The core idea is just that perception
involves this process of construction where what you already
know is being used to try to construct a
picture of how things are that is then sent
out to meet the sensory information. So that only
the differences between what you've constructed and what's indicated
by the incoming information get to do further work
trying to draw out different more refined predictions. So
to that extent, we're kind of um if you
like hallucinating our world, but we're doing it in
a way that is highly controlled, hence the controlled
in controlled hallucination. Um IT'S controlled by basically estimating
uncertainty properly. So knowing how much you should be
relying on current prediction error versus expectation that might
be very different on a foggy day compared to
uh a non foggy day, for example. Um And
uh and also, you know, just the um the
goodness of the model that you started with. So,
so I think it's fine to talk about perception
of controlled hallucination. As long as we really, really
don't lose sight of the controlled bit in there.
We are, we are anchored in some way in
the world by pre prior learning and the prediction
error signal and, and that's hugely important. Otherwise, we're
just making things up and there's no explanation for
how can we survive,
right? Uh So I would like to understand a
little bit better how the dynamic then between the
world and our minds work. I mean, what is
uh what do we get exactly from the world
that in forms our predictions? I would, I'm trying
to understand a bit better uh what it is
or, or if there's something about our predictions that
corresponds to something in the objective world or how
does it work? Exactly.
Yeah. Um So what is it that we're predicting
um basically um waves of energy hitting the sensory
receptors. So, ultimately, what the brain is trying to
predict is how its own sense organs are going
to be modified by um by incoming energies from
the outside world, either, you know, uh pressure in
airwaves or um or you know, wavelengths of light
or, you know, all the stuff that we are
actually um uh getting information from. Um SORRY, was
there what there was something else in your question
there though? That's what we're trying to predict. But
of course, in order to predict that we use
a whole cascade of predictions starting from really abstract
predictions, like, you know, I'm in my office. And
so I predict uh I predict desk type things,
microphone, um ring lamps, all of this stuff. Um
But those predictions of course, then have to reach
down to the point where they're actually, now I'm
looking up at the ring lamp briefly. Um I'm
making quite fine grain predictions about where things are
in space, how the kind of light and shadow
is falling and prediction errors at that level are
kind of much closer to the incoming sensory information.
They then have to be used to, to correct
things in a way that might cascade all the
way up to the high level prediction. So that
maybe it's like, oh no, my my ring light
is broken today, I'm using someone else's and it
looks completely different, that kind of thing. So um
so there's a, there's a lot going on. Um
BUT it's basically trying to get to grips with
waves of energy. And the best way of getting
to grips with those waves of energy turns out
to be to hallucinate if you like or to
um I will say that word to hallucinate a
world of um of uh middle sized objects, things
like ring lights and microphones and desks, cos they're
the things that we can interact with. That's the
sort of right level of description to capture a
world, which is apt for human interaction so that
I can then decide oh I need to adjust
the angle of the ring light. Uh OK. This
is what I need to do. That's, I think
that's what we're, that's what we're trying to get
with these flurries of prediction and prediction arrow.
But I mean, this is more of a metaphysical
question I think, but when it comes to what
we perceive, to what extent does that correspond to
something really out there in objective reality?
See that I was hoping you'd forget about that
question along the way of that previous answer because
that is a really, really good question to ask.
Um, I think the answer is that we don't
know, I, I don't actually know how anyone could
if you like sort of, um, put together what
we learn about objective reality from physics, which I
think is kind of our best shot at something
like, um, reality as it is independent of, of
human thinking and reasoning. You know, it's probably not
completely independent, but at least it's a shot. Um,
AND then the stuff that we see, you know,
you can, you can show that the stuff that
we see is kind of, um, the stuff that
we see is not impossible, given what we know
about the ultimate nature of reality. If we take
contemporary physics seriously, it's not impossible. But if you
then ask so to what extent is it accurate
or? Right, then I don't think there's any further
answer than it's just, it's just the picture that
does the best job of letting us interact with
our world and agree with the other humans that
we share the world with. So I think there's
those sort of two forces um kind of uh
acting upon us to keep our pictures in line
with each other and that's agreement with each other
and in line with the world. And that's um
the fact that my actions have to succeed or
II, I kind of um fall off the bridge
and die. So beyond that, I don't think there's
anything to say about how close we are to
reality or far from it where most of the
time we're just good enough to get by. And
I think that's, you know, that's all that evolution
wanted, didn't want to spend kind of extra money
and resources on kind of fine tuning how we
see the world. If it's, if there's no benefit
in action, why, why would evolution care about that?
So I think it's all about acting successfully. So
when you've got a picture that lets you act
successfully on the world and you're kind of able
to agree with the others that you're acting in
the world with, then I'm happy to say that's
as close to reality as we're gonna get. Thank
you. Uh
Yes. But, but then let me ask you a
somewhat different kind of question related to that. So,
but can we say that the things we perceive?
I don't know the computer, the ring light, the
microphone are real. I mean that, that were they
real? Uh CAN we apply it to the kinds
of things we perceive or not?
Yes. OK. I want to say, I, I come
out to come clean here. I want to say
it's real. I want to say that I can
say that the microphone in front of me is
real. You know, I can, I can raise it
up. There we go. Um It's definitely, you know,
uh what was that old philosophical slogan? Um Something
like if you can kick it, it's real or
something. Um So yeah, I think, I think it's
real but at the same time because I'm cons
because my view here is that rea reality is
the interact space. If you like, then something that
appears to me in a sufficiently complex virtual reality
would be just as real as the, as a
microphone because if I can interact with it and
I can agree with other people on, on what
it is and everything works well like that, then
that's as good as we've got in the real
world. So yeah, real. But is it reality as
we might have pre theoretically wanted it to be
where it's really, really, really real? Um I don't
think we can say that all we can say
is this is a, this is a picture that
lets us get by.
Mhm A and so if we were plugged into
Robert Nozick Experience Machine, the kind of information it
would feed our brain. Could we say then that
whatever kind of experiences we have there would be
as real as what we perceive in the outside
of the machine, let's say
uh OK. Confession time. Um When I called the
book The Experience Machine, I didn't even know about
the uh nos Thought Experiment. So the, the, the
book title has nothing particularly to do with that.
Nor am I an expert on that thought experiment.
Um My intuition is that I want to say
yes, I want to say that, you know, um
uh if you like uh uh as long as,
as long as my grip on the world is
sufficient to interact with it properly, and I'm able
to agree with others at that time, then I
can't think of anything else to demand. And if
I understand that thought experiment correctly, which I may
not, then that's what, that's what Nozick is trying
to give us a situation where we kind of
have some intuition that we're disconnected from the world.
And yet all of that all of that interaction
and agreement space is somehow um preserved um to
the extent that that's possible. Then I'm happy to
say that. Uh Yeah, that's just sort of more
reality. If you like a kind of extended version
of, of, of the same reality.
Mhm We're going to get more into extended cognition
later. But let me ask you now, how do
you look at the relationship between sensory information and
expectation? What is the expectation in this context?
Yeah. So expectation here, I use the word um
pretty much synonymously with prediction here. Um So, you
know, if I ever do try to make a
distinction, it would be that expectations tend to have
more to do with conscious expectations. Prediction captures a
lot of the unconscious stuff too. But a lot
of the time I just use them interchangeably. Um
So what, what do we say about that as
well? Um There, if you like structured linked representations
of an actionable world, that's I think that, that,
that is the bedrock of what I think here
is that um action is a kind of keystone
and you have structured linked representations that are doing
things like um helping, helping me locate objects in
space and helping me interact successfully with the object.
So I need to locate the microphone right now
in space because I've decided to look at it.
And if I was gonna pick it up, then
I need to understand pre understand stuff about where
the heavy bits are. Um HOW I should pick
it up if I want to use it in
a certain way. And all of that information is
a sort of interlinked structure that um that if
you like gets sent out towards the sensory peripheries
so that it can meet incoming sensory information and
work out whether all of those things were adequate
or not. Um And if they're inadequate, then I,
my brain will have another go. Um And if
I judge them to be adequate, then my whole
brain body system will probably have a go at
picking it up. And if I got it wrong,
then prediction error signals will gain a result. So
there are lots of places along the chain here
where um where the world can correct me if
you like, it can correct me just by I
take a better look and it now looks a
little bit different. I didn't get, get the contour
quite right first time or it can correct me
because I actually tried to use that information and
couldn't and sort of failed to pick it up
properly. So that sort of it's an interlinked data
structure where everything is already bound together that is
trying to predict the flow across the the time
locked flow across all of the the sensory interfaces,
sight, sound touch. Um And that's of course, a
very complex and difficult task, but one that brains
like ours seem enormously well adapted to, to perform
but not that. No. Yeah. Right. Yeah.
So cognitively speaking, this process also ties to learning,
right? Because it's through learning that we kind of
update our predictions about whatever we are perceiving.
Yeah. So learning, I think learning is is kind
of it's happening all the time. It's not sort
of. So unlike actually a lot of uh a
lot of contemporary um work in machine learning. Uh
WHAT brain brains are always turned on in learning
mode. So everything that's going on can if you
like affect the underlying generative model. Um And learning
just is the process of, of updating the generative
model. That is if you like um that is
represent, I want to say represented in the brain.
But I don't want that to, to, to sound
too much like classical forms of representation. Some people
just like to say it's kind of structurally inherent
in, in, in how the brain becomes after, after
you've been engaged with stuff in certain ways. So,
you know, obviously there are real physical changes that
um uh that, that correspond to the changes at
this more abstract level in what's in the generative
model and how it behaves. Um But yeah, so
learning is updating the generative model and we're doing
it all the time
and through this framework, how would we approach illusions
or what people in cognitive science and neuroscience call
illusions, how would we understand them and approach them?
Yeah, illusions are really, really interesting, I think because
what, what they're kind of, they're sort of one
of the places in which the fact that the
brain is a prediction machine becomes apparent to us
because what the sort of illusory um contexts are
doing in general is messing with our predictions by
um by, if you like sort of tripping us
up because our prediction machinery makes assumptions about how
the world is and under, in a lot of
the illusions, those assumptions are, are not correct. So
in, um in an Amy's room, for example, where,
you know, you see someone there and they look
really, really big at the, at the, at the
back of the room like giants. It's because of
sort of the, um the uh what's the word
kind of like contours, the lines and shapes in
the room are such that in the real world,
you would most normally come across those building kind
of square like structures. And if a person's head
reached the ceiling there, then they would be really
big. But of course, in the actual Amy's room,
um the the the structures don't work like that.
And so a small person is kind of reaching
the ceiling um at one end. Uh So it's
so I think all illusions have something of this
uh of this structure. Um Think about the favorite
in this uh maybe in this whole literature, the
hollow mask illusion where you take a, a standard
joke shop mask and you turn it so that
the concave side is facing you, you light it
from behind and you retire to about 5 ft
away under those conditions, it looks like the convex
side of the mask is facing you. So you
see a face with the nose sticking out even
though what you're actually in front of is um
the side where the nose is sticking in and
actually sticking out uh the back of it. Um
So what's going on there seems to be that
we have such strong predictions about the typical shape
of faces with noses coming outwards that um the
real information that's coming from the world specifying concavity
is just being trumped or um you know, being
superseded by a strong prediction. We've got a prediction
that we assign high or our brains automatically assign
high reliability to. And that means that real sensory
information is being treated as noise and just ignored
as the percept of the world emerges. And I
think this is, this is what's going on in
very, very many cases of illusions. It's sort of,
it's manipulating our expectations and, and certainties to um
to allow the brain to force onto the world
something that in this case isn't actually there. Um
Anyway, there are many, many more cases there that
we could talk about. There's a case of the
dress, the famous dress that people see in as
blue or gold. It's a very beautiful um account
of, of how all that works. Um But maybe
we'll come to those later.
Mhm Yes. But let me ask you then when
it comes to illusions, would you call them perception
or prediction errors? Are they errors or are they
just the, the normal way? Our uh perception is
cognition?
Yeah. Yeah. I think I, I think I prefer
the latter. I think I say this is just
the normal way that perception and cognition works. It's
a, it's a process that is dependent on assumptions
and um to the extent that those assumptions are
sort of uh uh are in place in the
particular context and you're going to perceive the world
as it is if you like and if you
mess around with those assumptions, um then you will
get some other kind of, of percept. So, you
know, in the case of the dress that we
just mentioned, the assumptions seem to be to do
with where the light's coming from. Is it coming
from above or is it a more sort of,
uh, diffuse light? So, um, is it the kind
of light you'd have in an artificial setting where
the, the source is rather, um, rather simple and
coming from a certain position? Or is it more
like daylight? Uh, IT seems that, uh, people that
assume it's more like daylight, see the dress as
gold, whereas people whose brains assume it's an artificial
light, see the dress as blue. Um, THERE'S actually
an interest in relation between whether you're a lark
or an owl, whether you're someone that likes to
rise early in the morning or linger in bed
a lot longer. Um, IT turns out that people
who are naturally larks tend to see the dress
as gold and people who are, are naturally owls
tend to see it as blue because they've had
more experience of um artificial light versus natural light.
This is work by Pascal Wallis and uh and
co in New York. And I, I think it's
rather wonderful because it shows how little little features
of our daily experience, install the kind of predictions
that structure perception in ways that may hide unexpected
differences between different individuals, like the people that see
it as blue and the people that see it
as gold.
OK? But in the case of the the dress,
the there's uh I mean, in that particular case,
at least there's an objective answer, right? I mean,
if someone would bring would, would bring on the
dress, we would know for sure if it's blue
or yellow
because the, you know, the actual photograph, if I
remember this right was taken in artificial light and
so blue is the correct answer. I think, I
think that's right. Um And then the people that
see it as gold like me, well, you know,
there it is, you know, I think it looks
much prettier as a gold dress. So I'm pleased
to be seeing it as gold, but I am
wrong in that case, in, in, in some, in
some reasonably objective sense, I think that's right. Yeah.
Uh And how does this all relate to four
e cognition for recognition, being embedded and acted, extended
and embodied cognition. What is the relationship here?
Yeah. Um That is a, that is a question
that many people ask me partly because I'm being
fairly strongly associated my own previous work quite strongly
associated with both embodied and extended cognition. Um So,
you know, there's a sort of question arises why
on earth? Is, is, is Clark interested in predictive
processing that to some people looks like a very
um disembodied brain centered um uh picture of what
mind and cognition is. Um But deep down, I
think that actually, you know, there had to be
some account of what brains do in these complex
brain body world systems and predictive processing seems to
me to be the best such account that has
emerged so far. And among the reasons why I
think that that's if you like um good news
for four E cognition rather than bad news for
four E cognition is that um the the sort
of core of the of what the brain is
trying to predict is action. So, you know, I
think brains like this are really action systems. All
these predictions are constructed to so as to enable
us to act better on the world. So embodied
cognition is is at the forefront, these are these
are generative models that are there for creatures that
have bodies and want to use those bodies to
do things in the world. But then there's one
other thing that is worth bringing in which is
that um as action systems, what predictive brains are
are doing for the brain body system if you
like is exploiting it to get better information all
the time. So because of this constant estimation of
our own certainty or uncertainty, which is really the
core of the the predictive process in picture, then
um brains will control bodies to perform actions that
reduce their own uncertainty um so that they can
get things done better. So if I want to
go and see a movie tonight, um then to
produce the right sequence of actions, I'm gonna do
things like consult the web to find out what
time the movie starts. Consult the web to find
out when the bus comes. Um THE the use
of the external world as an information resource flows
really automatically from the underlying way that predictive processing
um structures, information flows. They're all about um they're
all about gathering information to reduce uncertainty to act
successfully. So for that reason, um the there's back
in the day when I was working on the
extended mind, there was uh an ongoing puzzle which
was something like. So how does the right stuff
come together at the right time? There's something like
there's some neural work going on and then there's
some physical stuff. Maybe I'm reaching out and looking
at a notebook or consulting an iphone or the
web and you know, how does how does the
right set of resources come together at the right
time to solve the problem? Um Predictive processing I
think is the answer to that question and it
all comes together under ongoing estimates of what will
best reduce the uncertainties that need to be reduced
as we get, as we try to do the
things we wanna do. So that's a kind of
long winded answer. But, but basically, um I think
that what looks like a neuro centric framework here
turns out to be one that will automatically engage
the body in ways that minimize uncertainty, using resources
in the world. So then we've got extended cognition,
natural born cyborgs, all the, all the other stuff
that I've kind of um uh cared about in
the past.
Uh But uh I mean, if we, if we
agree or if we accept this four e cognition
framework, then where exactly is the boundary between uh
ourselves and the outside world cognitively speaking? Or, or
is there even a boundary, a precise boundary or?
Yeah. Um BOUNDARIES are uh uh uh AAA very
hot topic in um in active inference and predictive
processing because there's an awful lot of work that,
that stresses and rightly in a way, the importance
of uh of a statistical um construct called a
markoff blanket, which kind of sounds like it might
be a physical thing, but it isn't really, it's
just a statistical construct where um you um you,
if you like um you pause the, the information
flow within some large system in a way that
enables you to treat parts of that information flow
as uh arising at the boundary and other parts.
So some parts are on the outside, some are
on the inside and some are on the boundary.
Um But it turns out that um because that's
just a statistical construct, you can apply it in
all kinds of ways. If you're looking at the,
you know, the blind person with the cane, you
can uh motivate a markoff blanket that includes the
uh the edge of the cane uh as well.
Um Or you can have a markoff blanket that
stops where the brain stuff stops, or you can
have a markoff blanket that stops where the hippocampus
stops. So this is just to say that the
um I think the question where the boundaries really
are is a question that we shouldn't ask. We
should just say um given what I'm trying to
explain right now, where is it useful to think
about boundaries? Um And that depends on what you're
trying to explain and uh not just what, but
um with what sort of perspective you're trying to
explain it. Uh So, you know, someone that uh
someone that is interested in city planning is going
to be very interested in uh in a lot
of boundaries that lie outside individual brains, but include
lines of sight with sort of um trees and
walls and fences and stuff like that. Um Other
people might be much more interested just in what
the brains do and kind of how it can
sort of um how it can sculpt control a
very local interaction with uh with the world. So,
um so boundaries I think are super important but
should never be taken. Um SO seriously that we
cease to look at what appears to be outside
of them. And sometimes when we do that, we
realize there's another whole way of looking at the
system where it's that larger perspective that is actually
more fruitful. And I think that's what the history
of distributed and embodied and extended and inactive cognition
has really been doing for us is just kind
of saying, hey, look at some of these larger,
larger holes and the patterns that uh that are
emerging in them.
Mhm uh And but since you mentioned a concept
like the Markov blanket, does all of these, I
mean, the the idea of the brain is a
predictive predicting machine and stuff like that. Does it
also connect at least to some extent with the
free energy principle or not?
Yeah, I think it, yeah, I mean, yes, yes
has to be the answer it connects, it connects
deeply with the free energy principle. Um Nonetheless, most
of my own work steers slightly clear of the
free energy principle, which kind of um does its
work at a very, very abstract theoretical level? That
is kind of, I think it is doing very
interesting work. Um It's trying to say from first
principles like what does it take to be an
object. What does it take to be a live
system? Um You can say things about um about
persistence in the face of perturbation that seem really
interesting. Um THE mathematics, so I'm told looks an
awful lot like some of the mathematics of predictive
processing. So you can kind of see um you
can kind of see um you can see a
living system, for example, as morphologically a kind of
prediction of the sort of environment that it's going
to live in the shape of the fish is
a kind of prediction of the hydrodynamics of seawater.
So, you know, once you're using the free energy
principle, then I think a lot of things fall
into place, but the cost of them falling into
place is that very often what you're dealing with
isn't sort of process level prediction in the way
that um the original computational explorations in this area
were looking at sort of process level prediction um
that probably didn't really make all the sense I
wanted it to. But I think the kind of
idea there is that the free energy principle is
a really, really big picture that tells us a
lot of things that are probably necessary truths about
life and mind. They're very, very helpful because they
put life and mind on a kind of uh
a continuous trajectory. Um But deep down my own
interest is in the process model that is implemented
by the human brain So to that extent, I'm
kind of, you know, I'm very interested in what
are the actual computations being performed by the brain
when it solves problems? Like revealing a structured world
to me in perception and deep down, I don't
think that every living system encounters a structured world
in perception. I don't, I don't know, no one
knows. But I don't think that a single celled
bacterium maybe not a, not a plant either encounters
a structured world um in perception or by perception.
So I think there's something very interesting about what
um what complex brains are doing that is somehow
making experience of the kind that we recognize as
experience possible. And I think that's got an awful
lot to do with, you know, cascades of prediction
that bring together multiple sources of information and that
reach across multiple times scales. And at that point,
I think the um that's where if you turn
up all those dials on a free energy account,
you get the kind of process level accounts that,
that I've mostly looked at.
Mhm So another thing that you also talk a
little bit about in the book has to do
with the sort of implications that this framework would
have for neurology and psychiatry. So, could you tell
us a little bit about that? And then I
will ask some follow up questions about it?
Yeah. So, you know, if, if you were to
ask what's the practical um value or the cash
value of treating the brain as a as a
kind of prediction machine that is constantly estimating its
own uncertainty. I think the answer is computational psychiatry.
I think the um what what you can, what
it looks increasingly like you can do is apply
this general picture of how brains like ours process
information and then ask the question um suppose that
you change some of the settings so that you
were put in. Um SO that you estimated the
certainty of sensory information more highly than other people,
or you estimated it more low, more, more, more
low than other people. Um What would happen then?
Well, you, you know, it's uh it's being argued
here that if you put a extra weight on
the sensory information so that you really enhance the
value of the sensory information, um Think about what
that's gonna do. It's gonna make it harder to
bring your top down expectations to bear on the
sensory signal to make things fall into place. It,
the world will seem to be throwing you important
information all the time that you need to be
taken account of. And that corresponds fairly closely to
the phenomenology of autism spectrum disorder or autism spectrum
condition, I should say. Um So conversely, if you
put a lot of value on your own predictions
and less value on the sensory information, then you'll
hallucinate things just because um your brain has started
to expect them. And so again, accounts of psychosis
seem to emerge quite naturally from that setting of
the dials. Um There's also some very interesting stuff
on the way that um the way that cycles
lock uh misguided predictions in, in the case of
psychosis or chronic pain, that is it where your
expectations and predictions help construct a sensory realm that
seems to confirm the expectations and predictions. So no
matter how many times you sort of encounter things,
you're kind of morphing them into the shape that
confirms the predictions that led to the altered experiences.
So it can be very hard to break out
of some of those um cycles of uh depression,
chronic pain, um functional neurological disorders, they all have
this kind of cyclic thing where um expectations that
things are gonna hurt or they're not gonna go
well all to the way you experience the world
and the way that you interact with the world
and you can't gather new information that would revise
your estimates of how things are gonna go and
how much pain you're feeling. So I think that,
that, that, that this general picture has a lot
of promise for one day delivering a much more
nuanced understanding of the whole range of human experience.
If you think of us as as kind of
having multilevel sensory expectations, multilevel predictions, little dials all
the way through the brain body nexus that are
set in different ways in different people, constructing worlds
of um emotion experience uh and pay differently. Um
So that's, that's a very long answer again. But
the, the, the, the kind of um computational psychiatry
I think is uh is a really, really exciting
area and one that these accounts can contribute to.
Mhm. But then if someone suffers from some sort
of mental illness, like for example, you gave the
example of depression and I think we can also
talk about schizophrenia and stuff like that. I, is
it the case or are the cases of our
unconscious expectations malfunctioning? Can we talk about malfunctioning here
or not?
Um Well, that's a very, very delicate question. Um
BECAUSE in a way it looks as if the
system is just doing what it ought to be
doing but, but very often um just doing it
with a AAA kind of a strange estimate of,
of what's reliable or what isn't reliable um or
on the basis of aspects of information that are
really there, but they're not the only aspects. So,
you know, um you, you probably are getting all
kinds of signals from the world saying that um
you're not putting on a good show at this
party or, you know, this talks not going. So
as well as I wanted it to or, or
something, you know, there are real signals there. Um
But if you focus on those and kind of
amplify those, then of course, um then of course
you end up with a, with a take on
the world that will incline you to act in
the world in ways that harvest the sort of
information that confirms your predictions, you know, you avoid
the party or you um or you start to
um to mess up your explanations and so on.
Um So, so is it malfunctioning? Um THERE must
be cases where there's something like a very physical
malfunction involved. So, you know, if, um if dopamine
weighting, dopamine systems and other neurotransmitter systems are playing
the major role that predictive processing thinks they're playing,
they're the encoders of these precision weightings that modulate.
Um HOW, how much you uh how much value
you're putting on prediction versus sensory information. If that
stuff really, really starts to um to, to fire
almost randomly, then all kinds of crazy things are
gonna happen to you. So that's malfunctioning, I think.
But it's quite likely that in an awful lot
of the cases that we encounter in the real
world like chronic pain and depression, there's no malfunction.
It's just a sort of a, it's just a
history of kind of evidence accumulation and habit that
is sort of slowly put you into a certain
kind of hole and that hole is really, really
hard to get out of because you seem to
be constantly getting information that confirms that your estimates
of how things are are correct. Um There's a,
there's some nice experiments with heat pads that show
these effects in perfectly normal subjects you know, you,
you sort of, um, you, you set them up
with a little um geometric cue that predicts a
certain kind of high or low intensity heat. Um
And then you, the subjects are all given, although
they don't know this the same amount of heat
through a heat pad. Now, unsurprisingly, the ones who
saw the geometric queue associated with a high reading
on the temperature scale report experiences of more heat,
more pain than the others. But interestingly, no one
ever updates their um no one ever updates their
expectations after they've been uh presented with manipulated with
the real heat patch because they just think this
confirms their expectations of more or less heat because
their sensory experience has been morphed in that direction.
So it's a sort of self fulfilling prophecy. There's
a a lot of these cycles of self fulfilling
prophecy that float around in these, in these accounts.
And I think they all have the same, the
same character predictions in train experience that seems to
confirm the predictions even when it would be a
lot better for you as an agent to push
outside of that little bubble of prediction.
Mhm But when it comes to neurology specifically, and
the way we classify diseases or mental illnesses in
psychiatry and psychology, would it would this framework have
implications there as well? I mean, in terms of
how we think and theorize about mental illness.
Um Yeah, I mean, nosology is one of those
words where I've never quite, it was a new
word to me when Carl Kristen introduced me to
it. Um I think it means something like a,
sort of, is it like a taxonomy? Something like
that? It's a sort of a, it's kind of
like a taxonomy into which these things fall and,
yeah. So I think it would really make a
difference to that because at the moment, the standard
practice is still to taxonomies according to symptoms, really,
it's to gather things together as you know, schizophrenia
or autism spectrum condition or, you know, whatever um
depression PTSD according to patterns of symptoms. But it
would be a lot more interesting if you could
um gather things together, if you could taxonomies on
the basis of underlying causes, something like the, you
know, the dial on prediction is turned up in
this particular area. The dial on sensory information is
turned up in this other area that, that sort
of stuff that might yield a different carving of
the space of um both neurotypical and atypical response.
So, so maybe one day, I, I've sort of
said this a couple of times in talks, but
I still quite like the image. Um MAYBE one
day we'll have a sort of periodic table of
experiential variation. So you can see how if these
different dials are turned differently, you get stuff that
looks like depression or it looks like PTSD or
it looks like autism spectrum condition, but you get
them in a whole range of different flavors and
ways according to the precise settings on those dials,
that would be, that would be such an exciting
development in a way because just like the periodic
table was it would, it immediately, um it immediately
suggests experiments and interventions and you know, what would
happen if we did this or could we control
this by some kind of, you know, maybe even
by some kind of gene intervention. And,
and do you think that this approach or this
framework could also pave the way toward more effective
treatments in the case of psychiatry?
Um Yes, I think so. Um AT the same
time, so, so OK, let me um let me
pick on what, what I think is the best
um poster case for this, which is so called
pain reprocessing theory. So people that have chronic pain
and chronic back pain is a great example. Um
CHRONIC back pain in about 82% of cases, there
seems to be no sufficient underlying structural cause that
correlates with the, the way the pain is experienced,
the degree of pain, the context of pain. And
this is not just across individuals, but even, you
know, the same individual uh in different times of
day and different weeks. Um So, so if you
take something like that, one of the interventions um
goes by the name of pain reprocessing theory is
to get people to first of all, first of
all, you introduce people to the general theoretical understanding
that we've been sharing today, the general idea that
experience is always constructed on the basis of this
mixture of prediction and um sensory information. So you
are getting the sensory information from, you know, various
um various nerves and you know, used to be
called noso seor, but that seems wrong because, you
know, pain is just not the sort of thing
that you exactly sense. You know, things happen to
those nerves and then pain happens to us because
of the way we're crunching that information together with
our own expectations, with our own assessment of the
context, with our own um estimates of certainty and
uncertainty when all of that comes together, pain is
experienced. So once people are introduced to that, then
it's a fairly small step to say. So, you
know, well, there's actually wiggle room in here, you
can control your own pain experiences to some extent
by changing the the set of predictions that your
brain is bringing to bear. How do you do
that? You mostly do that by acting in ways
that go beyond where the current pain signal is
kind of telling you to go. So people often
talk here about uh pain as a kind of
warning light as if it's a kind of warning
light that is telling you don't keep doing this
cos if you do any more of this, you're
really gonna hurt yourself and, you know, that's true
for acute pain. That's true. If I've just, um,
twisted my ankle on a mountain walk or something.
Yeah. Don't keep walking on that. It's gonna get
a lot worse. Um, CHRONIC pain doesn't seem to
behave like that as people say, it's more as
if the warning light itself starts to be the
problem. You've got the warning light on, it's saying
don't do anymore. But actually if the warning light's
malfunctioning because it's your own predictions of the pain
you're about to experience that are causing um at
least part of that pain. Then um the right
thing to do is to behave, to behave um
in ways that for a while you will find
uncomfortable, you know, for a while, this is sort
of like this is like continuing to drive with
the warning light flashing. But the good thing is
that over time, it looks as if just by
continuing to drive the vehicle, the warning light gets
a bit dimmer. It's as if your brain starts
to learn that actually the expected consequences weren't quite
as bad as you kind of thought. They were
gonna be. You can keep on acting. For example,
it's not painful enough to stop you acting, you
then downgrade your sort of um picture of how
bad the pain actually is. And so these interventions
are all really go through action, I think, push
back against the hidden unconscious predictions that are structure
in the experience of chronic pain. And this is
the um chronic back pain is the one case
that has been studied by a couple of pretty
big, um you know, proper controlled randomized, um big
um big numbers of participants stuff. There's a couple
of papers out there that show that there are
some very, very good results here, sort of, you
know, 70 to 80% of the of the chronic
back pain patients reported improvement in ways that went
beyond the improvement you got with placebo um under
randomized conditions. So no, it's a pretty, pretty promising
that I think is a general picture. These are
the sort of interventions that we knew about. Anyway,
think about cognitive behavioral therapy um for um for
depression, for example. Um BUT they now fall into
place as part of this as flowing naturally from
this picture of prediction is doing a lot of
the heavy lifting and constructing experience.
So one aspect of our cognition or at least
I think it's part of our recognition as well
that I haven't asked you about yet has to
do with emotion. So what is the emotion and
how do you understand the emotion according to this
framework?
Yeah. So emotion, that's the other big player I
think really um action is, is I think the
sort of the the biggest player in the predictive
process in arena, but emotion is somehow um right
in there sculpting action patterns after all, you know,
um what emotion in some ways is, is a
kind of extra waiting um either in favor of
or against particular patterns of response and action. So,
if we want to start thinking about emotion, using
this framework, I think we need to look at
two things. One of them is um interception. So
uh our sense of what's going on or our
brain sense of what's going on in our own
bodies, um our brains, sense of our heart rate,
our brain's sense of what's going on in the
gut. Um AND so on. So it, it, it
does seem this is the sort of stuff that
William James as you know, is, is kind of
most famous for, for saying it does seem as
if the felt nature of emotion is linked in
some deep and important way to our appreciation of
our own bodily responses. Um uh In, in William
James is sort of a famous phrase of feeling,
you know, that there would be nothing left of
the feeling of fear if you subtracted the fast
beat in heart. Um You know, that's probably not
quite right actually. Um BUT nonetheless, what's emerged in
quite a lot of experiments is that if you
do give someone sensory information about say a fast
beating heart, then that can change the way that
they perceive the world. So false cardiac feedback and
my heart beating quicker than it really is can
make me see what would otherwise be a neutral
face as an angry face. Um And so my
sort of pick up on emotions in others, there
is being constructed through my pickup on my own
bodily state. Um And in general, I think emotions
involve bodily states in ways that are deeply interleaved
with our best grip on the context. Um Think
about the emotion of fear that I might feel
if my heart is just suddenly beating quickly, very,
very different to if my heart's beating quickly because
I've been exercising at the gym, you know, I'm
not gonna, not gonna feel fear at that point.
Not, not, not for a minute or two anyway.
Um So, um so yeah, so that's one element
is this uh that what whatever felt emotion turns
out to be, it's linked in some important way
to appreciation of our own bodily states. And then
the other thing is, and this is slightly technical,
but I think it's worth doing is our appreciation
of the um what is sometimes called the slope
of our own prediction error minimization. So I better
unpack that a bit. But, you know, brains like
ours are trying to quash prediction error. That's kind
of what they like to do, bring prediction error
down within acceptable levels. Um But because we're evolved
creatures, I think we've actually ended up with brains
that don't just want to quash prediction error. What
they really want to do is to curate useful
prediction error so that they can learn more about
the world that they inhabit or that we inhabit.
Um That means actually acting in the world in
ways that will cause some prediction error, the kind
of prediction error that you can resolve by getting
a better grip on how your world is. Um
So, so the the the work that I'm trying
to point to here is sometimes called work in
artificial curiosity. And the idea is that if you
have AAA prediction based system that is interested in
getting just the right amount of prediction error to
do good learning, then it will avoid situations that
are too boring because you're not getting prediction error,
you can't really learn anything from them. It will
avoid situations that are too difficult because in those
situations, you're getting loads of prediction error and you
can't tune your model or improve your model to
get rid of it. Um So we tend to
avoid those and then there's the little sweet spot
where you're getting enough new information from the world
to, to do some useful learning, but not so
much that you can't cope with it or so
little that you're bored. And that I think is,
I think a lot of our, our sort of,
I was gonna say human level emotions, I don't
know, probably all animals have bits to, to, to
be honest. But a lot of what we think
about when we think about emotion, I think is
our grip on our own um rate of minimization
of prediction error. We like those situations in which
we're doing better than we thought we would at
minimizing error, we avoid situations in which we're doing
worse than we thought. And situations in which there's
none to minimize are just too boring to worry
about. Um So, so those are the two things
that I think um this framework can bring to
the study of emotion. One is let's look at
predictions of bodily state and the other is let's
look at um let's look at the, the actual
profile of prediction error minimization and see where it's
most effective for driving learning.
And would this framework also have something to say
about consciousness and more specifically, even the hard problem
of consciousness?
Yeah. Uh ALMOST made me choke on my water
there. Um Yeah. Well, who can say um I
want to say yes, but I, but the only
way I can say yes is by doing what
many people would say is changing the subject and
not talking about consciousness at all. So, um I
want to say yes, because I think it helps
us make progress with both the nature of feeling
in, in the ways that we were just talking
about. Um That's to say the role of um
bodily prediction in the construction of response. Um And
also um our tendency to think that there's a
hard problem. So what I think these frameworks can
do, but this is ridiculously speculative. But I think
that these frameworks fall into place alongside stuff a
little bit like um Michael Graziano's attention schemer account,
um sort of they fall into a space where
the where brains like ours are going to yield
pictures of how the world is that present the
world as a very puzzling place to us a
place. So if I want to predict my own
behaviors, a good way to do it is for
me to think about myself as a system that
has some likes and dislikes. Um You know, this
is a Dan Dennett example. Um uh You know,
I I I'm the kind of person that uh
that likes cheese and doesn't like honey or something
like that. Um And so we sort of populate
our own picture of the world with these very
simple atomic notions like liking or disliking of uh
of cheese or honey. Um When of course, what's
really going on underneath is uh a long trajectory
of encounters, some of which um some of which
activated enough, uh enough, sort of um enough of
the, the pleasure circuitry in the brain if you
like to get me to come back for more.
Um A lot of this is context dependent. A
lot depends on also on stuff that I may
have just accidentally run across in my explorations of
the world, what your parents said, et cetera. Um
Maybe even some stuff at the level of, of,
of the distribution of taste receptors in, in the
mouth. So, you know, there's a lot you could
say from a, a kind of non Cartesian standpoint
here. And I think if you end up with
a picture where you can say something like this,
if I built a robot like this, it might
start to say things like, oh, I think I
must be a Cartesian mind because I don't really
understand how all these thoughts and feelings that I've
populated my picture of the world with um can
correspond to um you know, whatever physics tells us
is going on. How could that be? Um Well,
it doesn't have to be, you know, basically, we've
um this is just what's in our representation of
the world if you like. So if in our
representation of the world, we have all those things
that's not a problem for physical is, that's not
a problem, you know, that's not the, that's just
the sort of thing that physical is um can,
can easily accommodate because, you know, uh that's what
the brain is busy doing. You know, look, even
I don't feel satisfied with this response. It doesn't,
it does seem to me when I, when I
chat with Dave Chalmers, he will always say, yeah,
but I can kind of see there's a coherent
story to be told there. But do you really
think that um you know, the, the particular way
that this microphone feels if you run your hands
around it or the particular taste of the Pina
Colada or, you know, the look of the sunset.
Can they really just be, um, you know, what's
going on in my current most successful predictive model
of how things are, why would run in that
model feel like anything at all? Why wouldn't it
just feel like nothing or feel like making some
judgments about the world but not real feelings? I
think that's a real challenge. Um But at the
same time, I think that if we did start
to be able to build systems that um that
seem to get puzzled about their own experience in
the ways we do, that would be a really,
really, maybe a bit of a turning point in
uh our sort of confrontation with a hard problem.
And also if we had something like that periodic
table of experiential variation that I was talking about
earlier, if we had that and we could use
that to uh launch interventions that would change people's
experiences in ways that we could now predict. Then
I think we might start to think, oh, maybe
that was a hard problem. You know, now we've
got a picture we can intervene on the world.
Maybe if you live with that for long enough,
you just start to think, oh, I don't know
why we ever thought there was a hard problem.
You know, this, this, this is, this is the
solution and we've not reconstructed anything terribly unexpected there.
Um So, so, yeah, but anyway, the, the my
sort of history with the hard problem is a
lot of skirmishes. Never, never quite uh no surprise,
never quite, never quite get in anything that I
think is fully satisfactory. But I do think it's
worth exploring. Um If you like how a, how
a intercept inflected prediction machine capable of launching actions
in the world would end up depicting its own
mental space if you like its own, you know,
the the originations of its own actions, maybe that's
a way to proceed
a and are there any ways for us to
take control of our own experiences? I mean, the
ways we experience the world?
Yeah. So that one, that one I think is,
is a lot of, thank thank you for that.
It's a lot more tractable than the hard problem.
Um Yeah. So, you know, I think just by
appreciating the the role of prediction in the construction
of experience, we can start to um understand the
kinds of interventions that are likely to be helpful
and some of those are interventions that we can
do for ourselves. Um So reframing is, I think
maybe the easiest of all the examples here. Um
If you take something like my feeling of nervousness
before going on stage or doing a talk, I
was, I was getting those uh those tingles, you
know, about half an hour before we, we fired
this session up and I've learned to reframe them,
not as sort of nervousness or, oh, you know,
I'm gonna be so nervous. I, I mess my
performance up but rather, uh, chemical readiness to deliver
a good performance. You know, it's a tingle of
adrenaline. It's, uh, it's a good thing. So that
reframing really helps cos it stops you feeling nervous
because of your feelings because you no longer interpret
those feelings as nervousness, you interpret them in some
other way. Um So that's reframing like that or
it's the same thing the dentist is trying to
do to you when they say this will just
be a gentle tickle or you might feel a
little pressure here. Um These things are, are very
useful interventions. Um The pain reprocessing theory stuff, that's
another kind of intervention which is basically just um
remember that we're, we're machines that learn by action.
And so we can't reprogram ourselves in the most
interesting and powerful ways. Normally, just by saying things,
you know, I think verbal reframing is powerful. It
often can do some work. But where you've got
something that is really, really deeply ingrained and is
causing all sorts of um of trouble and self
fulfilling um action loops, then you need to change
the actions before you can change the flow of
unconscious prediction that is um that is causing the
trouble. And there, I think that just uh sort
of appreciating that you've often got to um got
to as they say fake it before you make
it, you know, start to start getting out there
and doing more despite the pain, despite the depression,
despite the nervousness and in some cases that's, uh,
that's gonna help. Um, THERE'S no one size fits
all here. Uh, YOU know, that, that, that can
make it sound far too good. Uh, ONE good
thing I think about these frameworks is that although
they can occasionally sound a little bit like the
power of positive thinking, they're really enormously far away
from that because just positive thinking won't really do
you any good. Um What you need to do
is is in train a whole cascade of predictions
that get things done and reveal the world to
you. Most of those are unconscious and you just
have to um repeat the cycle of interaction in
the world again and again and again to tune
that machinery. So it's a little bit like becoming
an expert car driver. If I just start to
predict that I'm gonna be able to drive the
car through this tiny little opening in the traffic.
Uh That's not a good thing for a novice
to try and do because they just don't have
the underlying structure of skills to cash that prediction
out in bodily action. So you then need, you
need the full training regimes of learning to drive.
And once you've done all that, then of course,
what you want to do sometimes is make a
a kind of optimistic but realistic prediction that I
can get through that space. Um You know, maybe
it's important, maybe you're taking someone to hospital in
an emergency run or something. So it's really important
to get through that space, then you want um
realistic yet optimistic prediction. Uh And that I think
is the uh is the kind of take home
message for uh self care here is that very
often uh realistic but mildly optimistic prediction is where
we want to be.
And what do we know specifically about the effects
of psychedelic drugs do does that also apply here
in the context of this framework?
Yeah, that's a really interesting case. It's not my
specialty, but I've hung out a little bit with
Carhart Harris and others that work on uh that
work on these things. Um The, the picture that
I take away from that is that um there
is a kind of, there's a sort of dose
dependent response where at low doses you're kind of
intervening on um low level predictions. And so, you
know, you may get visual effects, for example, with
um with a kind of low dose of uh
psilocybin or um or uh a ouca or something.
Um But then at higher doses, it looks as
if the cell groups that are affected are preferentially,
those that are deeper in the processing pathways. So
more abstract stuff to do with your picture of
yourself and your place in the universe. Um Now,
if you can uh relax the grip of our
self predictions at those high levels, that could be
very beneficial. You know, if you've been um chronically
depressed for, for, for many, many years, relaxing the
self predictions that might be at the heart of
some of your depression and just experiencing the world
without, that could be really revelatory. Um, THE same
for sort of, um kind of, uh uh sort
of end of life. Uh And the way you
treat your own, um your own end of life,
um stuff, if you've been diagnosed with terminal cancer
or, or something, um again, these are all cases
where it looks as if even a single experience
of, of feeling the world differently by relaxing those
high level self predictions can really change the way
that you feel for a long, long time, like
maybe for a year or a couple of years
or longer. Um So it's a really interesting account.
It's about the role of psychedelics in relaxing high
level self predictions, enabling you to enabling other other
pictures of how things are and what your relation
to the universe is to fall into place. Um
What is it? Uh THE Rebus model? That's what
I think Carhart Harris somewhere calls it relaxed beliefs
under psychedelics. Um And it's this sort of relaxing
of the predictions that are um that are currently
structuring your, your picture of yourself and your relation
to the universe. And allowing new stuff to, to
take shape. So another metaphor people use there is
shaking the snow globe, you know, like those little
little toys with, with snow in them, shake it
up and then you can uh then you can
maybe get some new patterns to fall.
So we're talking about different kinds of interventions. My
last question will be about meditation. So what do
we know about what we can do through meditation?
Yeah. Meditation is a very, very interesting 11 of
my, um one of my ex colleagues, uh Mark
Miller has uh an awful lot of work on
this. Um IS I think director or co-director of
a meditation center in Australia uh sort of meditation
and cognitive science center. Um So it looks to
me as if for those, for whom it really
works and maybe that's those who put in the
hours uh cos it's never really worked for me.
Um But for those for whom it really works,
it seems as if meditation uh gives you greater
control over your own precision waiting mechanism. So, you
know, the precision waiting stuff here is the um
is the the self estimated uncertainty that balances the
role of prediction against sensory information. So suppose that
um meditation by training you to, you know, to
focus all your attention on the breath or to
focus all your attention on uh on the stone
or something like that or to experience your thoughts
without holding on to them just letting them kind
of come and go. If you do that enough
and you gain more control over precision assignments, then
it looks as if you gain more control over
your own experience of the world, you can, um,
you should be able to confront what would otherwise
be very uncomfortable situations in a way that is
a bit less uncomfortable because you don't allow that
information, the high precision it would otherwise be allowed.
So that means it doesn't drive all of your
ongoing processing. There's some space for other stuff to,
to still go on. Um There's also some evidence
that highly experienced meditators have some power over um
over the, the way that they experience certain kinds
of um manipulation that are common in cognitive science
like binocular rivalry where you're kind of there, there,
there are two coherent interpretations of an image that's
in front of you. Um People tend to flick
from one to the other one interpretation. Uh SORT
of takes root does all the prediction, but you've
still got little bits of prediction error coming up
from the other one. So that pushes the first
one out. The other one comes in that cycle
keeps on repeating. Um EXPERIENCED meditators seem able to
intervene on that cycle. Just hold the mixed position
where you're seeing both images at once or hold
one of the two positions that suggests to me
um real control over precision. Waiting.
Great. So the book is again the experience machine,
how our minds predict and shape reality. I'm leaving
a linked with in the there it is very
nice cover. By the way, I'm leaving it, I'm
leaving a link with, sorry, in the description down
below. And uh Andy just before we go. Are
there any places on the internet where people can
find you and your work?
Uh Yeah. Um Well, there's um if you just
Google Andy Clark Sussex, you will get sent towards
the. Um I think it's called the Sussex Research
Explorer or something where all the, all the publications
are, there are some talks that are available online
and the one that I would most point people
to is um uh a royal institution discourse. Um
So the royal institution has a series called Discourses.
And I, I think that was a really, really
fun session. It was quite a long session. The
questions went really well. And so you want this
sort of account put together in a, in a
kind of way that seemed to make sense to
me at the time, run through all the stuff
we talked about today. Um Well, not all of
it didn't do emotion, I think. Um BUT quite
a lot of it uh with um further examples
and some of the big questions that are left
open, like stuff like um what really is the
relation between um between if you like conscious prediction
and all that unconscious prediction that you know, there
are lots of big questions left and that's one
of them. So yeah, thank you.
Yeah. So thank you so much for again, for
doing this. It's been a great pleasure to have
you on the show.
It's, it's been a lovely experience. Thank you. And
uh and thanks to everyone listening for listening. Thank
you.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by N Lights Learning
and development. Then differently check the website at N
lights.com and also please consider supporting the show on
Patreon or paypal. I would also like to give
a huge thank you to my main patrons and
paypal supporters, Perera Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick Suno
Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam, Castle Matthew Whitting
B no wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Connors, Philip
Forrest Connelly. Then the Met Robert Wine in Nai
Zuk Mar Nevs calling Hofi Governor Mikel Stormer Samuel
Andre Francis for Agns Ferger Ken Herz J and
Lain Jung Y and the K Hes Mark Smith
J. Tom Hummel s friends, David Wilson Yasa, dear
Roman Roach Diego, Jan Punter, Romani Charlotte Bli Nico
Barba, Adam Hunt, Pavlo Stassi, Nale Me, Gary G
Alman, Samo, Zal Ari and YPJ Barboza Julian Price
Edward Hall, Eden Broner Douglas Fry Franca Lati Gilon
Cortez or Solis Scott Zachary. Ftw, Daniel Friedman, William
Buckner, Paul. Giorgino, Luke Loki, Georgio Theophano Chris Williams
and Peter Wo David Williams Di A Costa. Anton
Erickson Charles Murray, Alex Chao, Marie Martinez, Coralie Chevalier,
Bangalore Fist de Le Junior, Old Einon Starry Michael
Bailey. Then spur by Robert Grassy Zorn. Jeff mcmahon,
Jake Zul Barnabas Radis Mark Kemple Thomas Dvor Luke
Neeson, Chris Tori Kimberley Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert Jessica, no,
Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson Ismael Bensley Man, George Katis
Valentine Steinman Perros, Kate Van Goler, Alexander Abert Liam
Dan Biar Masoud Ali Mohammadi. Perpendicular Janner Urla. Good
enough, Gregory Hastings David Pins of Sean Nelson, Mike
Levin and Jos Net. A special thanks to my
producers is our web, Jim Frank Luca Toni Tom
Vig and Bernard N Cortes Dixon Bendik Muller Thomas
Trumble Catherine and Patrick Tobin John Carlman, Negro, Nick
Ortiz and Nick Golden. And to my executive producers,
Matthew lavender, Sergi, Adrian Bogdan Knit and Rosie. Thank
you for all.